Nonlinear circuits with sinusoidal supply voltage

The use of nonlinear loads of domestic power ratings has increased greatly in the 1970's.
Devices such as television and radio receivers, light dimmers and multi-speed electric motor appliances usually incorporate controlled or uncontrolled rectifier elements.
Television receivers have an input rectifier the supply current then contains a d.c. component.
A typical supply current oscillogram for a monochrome television set,fig 5.1,illustrates the half-wave nature of the waveform.

Fig 5.1 Supply current waveform for a monochrome TV receiver.

This contains significant harmonic currents up to the 9th harmonic,as well as a d.c.term,fig.5.2.
For a standard UK make of 21 inch colour receiver the waveform of fig 5.3 was measured and the 50Hz' spikes' had peak values of 7 amps.
More recent colour receivers have been fitted with a full-wave rectifier input stage to the power supply to eliminate d.c. from the supply lines.
A typical supply current waveform is given in the oscillogram of fig 5.4.
In 1976,for example ,there were 18 million TV receivers in the UK - roughly one-half of then being colour receivers.

Industrial loads such as electric arc furnaces and thyristor controlled motors impose a severe nonlinear impedance into the distribution system.
For example,the first part of an arc furnace load cycle(3-8hours) is called the melt-down period during which the solid charge is melted.
This is characterised by severe current fluctuations caused by arc instability and the movement of scrap metal.
These current fluctuations,which are irregular and cannot be precisely predicted,can result in supply voltage dips to other consumers due to fluctuating currents in the supply system impedances.
For the purpose of studying energy flow and power distribution in nonlinear circuits it is convenient,however,to distinguish the group of applications 
where the supply voltage remains substantially sinusoidal in spite of the nonsinusoidal current drawn from the supply.
Such systems are found to possess certain interesting properties from the energy viewpoint and these  properties give useful insight into possible methods of power factor correction.

fig5.2 Harmonic components of the supply current waveform of fig 5.1
